---
title: Start with a shit kick, then polish.
date: 2016-09-14 00:00:00 Z
layout: article
category: kata
tags:
- marginalia
extract: If we’re serious about designing progressively enhanced then we need to start
  designing websites without assumptions, starting with the overused argument that
  we should be thinking type-first.
youtube: 76MgBFVGjiE
---

I've practised karatedo for almost two years, and I'm very much a beginner. I've always been pretty natural with sports but when it came to martial arts, I had to accept that I was just plain clueless.

Co-ordinating just one move fluidly? Difficult. Co-ordinating both left and right sides of an action were doubly difficult. Remembering that action in the following lesson, difficult again. Combining that action with another in sequence, both sides, compound difficult. And then learn their Japanese names, and then understanding their applications from kata, all difficult. And that's just physical actions, not mentioning philosophy.

<figure>
    <div class="FlexEmbed">
        <div class="FlexEmbed-ratio FlexEmbed-ratio--4by3"></div>
        <div class="FlexEmbed-content">
            <iframe
                class="o-posAbsoluteCenterAlt"
                src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/{{ page.youtube }}"
                frameborder="0"
                allowTransparency="true"
                allowfullscreen
                width="100%"
                height="100%" >
            </iframe>
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

Here is a video of mawashi-geri (roundhouse kick). The other night we were practising this kick. I had been working with uke (training partner) for about 5 minutes, my leg pulled up and out like a wing, high and round, then snapping out to and back from the body of uke. It was, as usual, difficult, and I was puffing.

Sensei—literally "person born before another"—strolled over, said "great, and now you should try to relax". We both paused, breathing heavily. "Here's a quick story" he continued, "not exactly a Japanese way of explaining it, more a Cairns way".

> Start with a shit kick. Then polish it on the next go. This way you're not trying so hard, because trying hard creates tension, and your body doesn't work as well when tense.

That hit me. Because I have perfectionist tendencies—for better and worse—I tend to try too hard.

I'm pretty sure you can apply the Shit Kick quip to most practises you undertake, and come out better for it. Action. Philosophy. Action again. Action better.

Perfect practise requires being unperfect first.
